This is this talk is about linker scripts and some of the some of the ways they differ
between GNU LD, LLD. There are some bits where I've kind of bent that definition a bit and
gone through the sort of the differences in the internals, sorry not the internals, as
in the internal linker script because at least with some linkers when you when you say you're
not using a linker script you are it's just a linker's provided it for you in the background.
So first slide is basically just some basics so that you can understand what I'm going to
be talking about for the rest of the talk. Apologies if you're already familiar with
ELF and linker scripts this will be a bit boring but just very very quickly linker's
job is to take input sections that you would have in your sort of ELF file normally your
dot text your dot data dot bss which is sort of zero initialized stuff and it will combine
them together into one bigger big blob and those are sort of then called output sections
so I will use the term input sections for stuff coming from your object file, output
sections what linkers combined together and then these will end up in program segments
in your ELF file and then basically your operating system or kind of copy will operate on a program
segment. Right so linker scripts sort of I guess more formally called linker control
scripts it's kind of like a domain specific language that the linker uses I guess most
the majority of the commands are to do with image layout you know where you map input
sections to output sections there are a few additional commands as well like for example
some of the commands are load more files and you might actually be surprised to know
at least some systems your libc is actually a linker script but it's a linker script
that loads the actual files behind the scenes to make sure you get them in the right order.
Yes some details on the command line. GnuLD has a built-in linker script so even though
and you can actually dump this with minus minus verbose if you're actually interested in
the horror of what the new internal linker script is but LLD and gold and assuming mold
as well basically have an internal they don't use an internal textual DSL scripts they kind
of mimic it using command line language that type of thing or just basically hard code things.
So one interesting thing this is just I guess not related to LLD or GnuLD but if you use
dash t or which is the short form for dash dash script the script that you provide will
replace the internal linker script but you can actually just put the script on the command
line as if it were an object file and that won't replace the linker script it will add to it so
you could basically add various different fragments that type of thing. Anyway here's an example
of a linker script so you can see what sort of things there this is one from a very very stripped
down one from an embedded system. I say I've used embedded systems kind of for the linker
scripts because generally if you're say linking on a in-user space and Linux or whatever you
really don't need to use a linker script for most of the time and the general advice is if you
don't need to touch linker scripts don't touch them. So memory command at the top that's basically
laying out where your various memories are on the embedded system you might have different
properties like one might be flash one might be RAM that type of thing. You have these things
called input sections descriptions which are that star dot text star that's the sort of things
that linker's going to filter against so when your input dot section it will match against
that dot text there. You have symbol definitions that you can put down that dot in the next
of the underscore in the EXE IDX start is called the location counter and that's basically
what will mean the linker will fill in with the address that was there at the time so basically
at the end of dot text there will be certain amount of addresses space being used so at the end
of that output section that value will get put into the symbol there so that your program can
basically introspect itself by using these symbols. Have built-in functions for example align and
these sort of arrow flash and at flash those are sort of ways of assigning things to memory
regions and that can become important for other things we'll do later on. Anyway, GnuLD and
LLD linker script handling so yeah as it's been mentioned in the GnuTalk this morning there's no
specification for linker scripts the closest we have is the linker script manual in the
Gnu documentation some parts are under specified some parts are implementation defined GnuLD and
LLD are also moving targets so even if you did decide to basically reverse engineer the source
code there would be no guarantee that by the next release it would be the same thing. So yeah so
generally LLD will try and keep as close to the specification as possible it has made a
design decision to differ in a few cases where there's been some I guess odd behavior accumulated
over time I'd say these are not well specified languages that have been sort of gone through a
programming committee they are accumulations of you know I wouldn't necessarily say hacks over
time but it has been developed over the course of 30 years and it's accumulated a lot of rubbish.
Okay so often placement so this is one of the areas where GnuLD and LLD differ slightly but
they give you roughly the same results so as we sort of went back to that previous linker script
and there were only fragments and it wasn't a complete specification of where all of the sections
go so linker scripts do not have to be complete and you could only actually need to give a partial
description and the linker basically if any section doesn't match any of those input section
descriptions it's called an orphan and then it's basically the link the manual says it is up to
the linker to place the orphans so basically it can place them where it tries to do something
that's relatively sensible so you can if you're concerned about that I want to know what the
link has done there is this this thing called orphan placement and it can tell you where things
are that type of thing and then there's also an option called dash dash unique where if you
want to get if you don't want the linker to try and mess about with combining your orphans
together it will just put them all in their own individual sections that type of thing.
Okay so here's an example of how a linker might place orphans what it tends to do is it tries
to match the properties of the section so like for example you've got an executable section
on the assembly code there you have the AX but for that means SHF ALOC executable A that would be
read only AW right that sort of thing prog bits there's something in the file no bits that's
runtime initialized zero to initialized data and the linker basically says okay what have I
already got in my linker script well I've already got a dot tech section that's good executable so
I'll place the one the orphan with a similar name afterwards that type of thing so that's the sort
of thing that would do one of the interesting cases that we'll get to is where does it place
when there's already symbol assignments so linker's got to be very careful to try not to break
someone so carefully place symbol assignment so here's just a very very quick textual detail for
some of the things that I've said there and in particular the example I've got at the bottom
here you've got this last one dot foo there's a section called bar and then someone's advanced the
location counter on a thousand so if the linker insert it says oh dot foo I can place that in
the section dot foo but where does it place it does it place it after bar does it place it after
the dot and the rule that the linkers take is it always puts it after any of the various expressions
that it's done there because in general this is this is where programmers might say I want section
start section end and if you insert something in the middle of that then you might have broken
someone's program who's been to say try to make their own table of pointers they're iterating
through that type of thing okay so here's an example of where GNU LD and LLD differ and this is
actually fairly simple one it's actually quite hard to get them to differ in most cases but
LLD in its default linker script prefers to place read only sections before executable sections
GNU LD has the opposite and will place in read only after executable so if there's no read only in
the linker script the link has got no information of which to say ah here's my anchor to place it
afterwards so they will make different choices and there was a bug reporter about about this saying
of the linker did something different but yeah it's one of those unknown difference
yeah another thing that this is more of a curiosity with LLD and it's just something that I see when
people port programs from another operating system is quite often someone will forget the A and if
you forget the A that's essentially telling the linker that this section is not part of the program
it's like a debug section that's metadata so now it does turn out that GNU LD and LD will place the
orphan at the same place but LLD unfortunately uses that as an anchor point for all of the other
sections so if you put in that particular case bar will get inserted after in bar there but then all
of the debug sections will get put after it because that's suddenly the anchor point for all the
no-alarm sections which is a bit of a curiosity I think at that point so yeah main thing if you
ever pointing a program from GNU and something weird goes on check your assembler and the chances are
you forgot to put an A flag on one of your sections okay okay so program header generations this is
somewhere where I'm going away from linker script and veering much more back to the user space area
so this is basically trying to explain some of the differences between separate code and no separate
code behavior on LLD and GNU LD so this is a an elf program header so this is what describes a
segment and the most important ones that you need to look at here are p offset which is the offset
in the file p viadra which is the basically the virtual address that the thing will be loaded at
and the p align which is a very very very strange very strange thing congruent to p offset modulo
p a lot a line and this is a I guess you could almost call it it almost seems like a trick and
to allow basically the same page in the file to get mapped in two different places in virtual memory
and that can save some physical memory yeah okay so in what I call that system five by system five
think of that as something like Linux or or BSD that type of thing now this elf file is actually
memory mapped using various M map calls into memory this is actually quite different from an
embedded system because an embedded system you probably wouldn't even load the elf file anyway
you would basically obj copy the load bits out and then you would have some you know bit of
initialization code copy from various bits to where they needed to be so they're actually in some
ways even though I guess the linker scripts were designed before elf elf is not really well designed
for embedded systems because you kind of almost misusing elf to make it work for embedded systems
in a lot of cases but anyway I'll go from here okay so the reason I'm mentioning program headers
here is that you can be very explicit in your linker script and use the p headers command but
most of the time you actually want the linker to generate these things for you because if you get
it wrong then the program just won't work so for a typical sort of link the the linker's gonna
look for this thing called the VMA to LMA offset which is basically LMA being the load address
and this is really only important in embedded systems where you for example want your load
address to be in flash but your execution address to be in memory that type of thing so if that
offset changes the link will change the program header you typically want all of your non zero
initialized thing before the zero initialized thing because that's the only way that elf and elf
program header can describe it and of course if you're changing properties from like RO to RW
that's that whilst you couldn't in theory merge them you generally don't want executable RW in
most systems okay so here's just a graphical example of some of the things that I'm making it's
quite complicated diagram but this is where you get this alignment coming in in that if you think
of your text segment there so I've deliberately done done that so it is just a bit smaller than
the memory page and I'm using a 64k page here so you've got the data segment that is not aligned
to a page boundary in the file if it was there'd be a big gap in it filled with zeros so what the
what the operating system actually does is it double maps that particular bits you end up with
the text segment mapped basically and part of the data segment mapped to the first page read only
and then you have the second bit mapped to read write into two separate pages there so we've
actually wasted one page of virtual memory but we've saved one physical memory page now the
interesting bit for this is that the mapping for the read write is copy on write so you can't
write to four one thousand and write into the read only execute bit but what it does permit you
to do is to basically read towards the end of the execute thing and you'll actually be reading into
the data segment read only now in theory if you've not protected your program and this probably
doesn't matter that much but if you have hardened your program against rock and chop attacks there
could be potentially gadgets in the read only data that if someone manages to redirect control
they can find more gadgets in that same so this is section called Z separate code where it will
sort of basically make sure that the read only executable is separated by page by pages so you
don't ever get this double mapping from there and as you can see for the GNU LD layout it's got some
execute then more read only and actually that can waste you quite a lot of pages in a small system
particularly in a 64 or something like that where you've got a 64k basic page so there are control
things for that so if you use no Z no separate code then you end up with them tightly packed like I
had before so quite often various district just rows will choose different values of Z no separate
code but if you do find hey all my binary sizes have suddenly got bigger it might be because of
this Z separate code now GNU LD does something slightly different to that in that because it
normally preferred read only before read only sorry read only executable before sorry read only no
executable before read only executable it didn't quite have that triple or a sandwich of read only
executable between the read onlys so by default LLD put would give you three program layout okay I
need to speed up a little bit here but anyway that's just one example of differences in memory layout
even without link script case okay so program segments and embedded systems so mentioned
before you're on you had this arrow to flash and at so this is how you would basically arrange it so
that your execution address for your data is actually in RAM but your load address your LMA is in
in flash and that and then some program will actually go and copy the stuff from the flash contents
into the RAM contents so reason I'm mentioning this is that there are some slight differences between
GNU LD and whatever so and there are certainly some problems with LLD that we know at the moment
so LLD at the moment will assume that your output section and is virtual memory address is
monotonically ascending so you can break this with a linker script like this where you kind of
because it's working top down it will just try and assign these sections into the memory region top
down and unfortunately that plus 64 that second section really should be after the after the section
in that file GNU LD is clever about this and it will actually sort the things to make sure that
they are in ascending order but LLD won't and you'll end up with a bit of code that tries to work
out what the virtual the load address is from its virtual memory address and it basically wraps
around and goes negative so that's one thing but known bug in LLD at the moment that we'll need
to fix but the other thing is say if you are writing and a linker script for embedded systems
please try not to make LLD difficult for your linker and put things in ascending order is what
I would say on there okay so just because I've only got probably one minute left how some other
things or gotchas that you probably need to look out for so dot assignment within an output section
see that dot equals four there and now you might think that means assign the location counter to
four but no it doesn't there's a special case that if you do that within an output section
it's supposed to be relative to dot section so that's actually saying dot equals dot section plus
four so yes so if you want to do that please well LLD has decided this is silly we're not doing this
and it just means dot equals four but it does mean if you have got an old linker script then
then you can end up getting caught like this and you have there is a way of doing things in
that's compatible with both which is used dot plus equals and it also that looks much nicer
and it actually lines up to what you probably intended to do anyway so I think with that I just
want to quickly mention some references and then I'll stop and so yeah so if you do want to know
about what LLD does and mass-grade the current LLD maintainer has gone through and basically
often when he wants to implement something he will put a blog post up up and write lots of
interesting things about what he's found out about various things so it's not documentation it's
definitely blog post type material sort of what's there at the time but it is quite useful to get
into what the internals of these sort of things done and then there's some various sort of bug
reports links and things there but I better stop there because I'm probably out of time now
okay so we've got two minutes so I might be able to get one maybe two questions or something like that
so the question is there an effort to standardize linker scripts I think it's very much down to
the community so I think what we've said in LLD is that if anyone wants to add to the
wants to change the linker script format then go to binutils mailing list and make sure you
get it agreed with the canoe and don't just input we definitely don't want to just pile
extensions into LLD but really it's just communication across the yet of the basic the
problem with standardizing it is that that means that they can't change it so I think there's probably
one they want to keep some of that yes so I know that if you use funky linker script stuff yeah
with LDO then LDO like you can do things like we talked about like instructor lists or LDO doesn't
seem to be able to take advantage of the link of the layout caused by linker script in order to
do things like preload data that it knows should be in certain locations yeah is that some sort of
fundamental limitation with the architecture or do you think that could be that so yeah there is
the question was about basically LTO and linker scripts probably not interacting very well so
yeah there there are some efforts that are going on with it within the LLVM embedded community
for this to try and basically say how can we make sure that you can place well basically
I'll probably take too long to answer this but things like interprocedural optimization
can break certain linker scripts sometimes you want to say here's this region of memory
it's and this region of memory and I do not want you to share things between these two bits of memory
but LTO basically just assumes it can do all of it so there is some effort ongoing but we need to
work out what the actual rules are here but we but yeah there is some effort in the community to go
on to try and fix that okay I probably best stop there for